Do you know, we've made something like 180 / 190 episodes of Grand Designs
I lost count, but one thing I do know is that this year we are 20 years old
So, how are we going to celebrate? Well, I'm going to share with the nation, with you
something which has remained until now a
relative secret
My favorite projects
Hello and welcome to Grand Designs
The foundations of Grand Designs the series were dug and delayed two decades ago, presented by a keen
excitable young man. In this series, we'll be looking at very different projects built by a wide range of people
Looking each week at one house, from start to finish
The compelling power of that simple storytelling idea hasn't changed over the years, unlike its visibly aging presenter
So the reason I am still here and that I have a job is thanks to the infinite variety of
buildings that there are out there to film, and great stories too. Having from filming villas
built beautifully from fiber reinforced concrete to, to
vaulting spaces entirely constructed from cross laminated timber, to mud huts stuck together with
straw and dog lick
From this great collection of vintage projects
I've distilled dams and flavors and mixed this heady Grand Designs cocktail for you
Get ready for some extraordinary stories retold now and then by our hero builders
So many people say to us "Oh it's yours, the house with the and the"
And it's not the one that failed that yes
We've been in the house now for a year and a half and
We pinch ourselves nearly every day
The house is imperfect as we are and that's pretty imperfect, so that's okay
We've had a tourist who said I have cycled all the way from Latvia. Can I come and look around the house? It's like okay
I've been following these grand designers for 20 years, and it's from over a
Mind-boggling a hundred and eighty episodes that I managed to choose five or so personal most loved projects
So the first on my simmered down reduced list of projects is a great favorite of mine
It's a project which I know very well partly cuz have been here so often
Probably the most visited of all the projects we've ever filmed
And I love it because it starts with the philosophy, a view of building
Based on craftsmanship, taking the materials out of the ground from the forests around you and building a house
predominantly with just those
I'd say that approach also means projects would take time, in this case
years
actually decades
First on my list is Mrs. Tiggy-winkles mansion
Otherwise known as Ed and Rowena's hand-built home on the hill
It's very flattering that kevin puts us in his top five, top five
He does
visit some fantastic buildings, and said to feel that we're one of those five top buildings for him is really flattering. It's lovely
Yeah, it's great
It was 12 years ago when I first met Ed and Rowena and their four children
I didn't know it at the time but this was going to be the beginning of an enduring friendship
So Ed, what are you gonna build on this site ?
A gorgeous house, of course
Ed's ambition was to craft by hand, a truly sustainable home with at its heart a great vaulted hall
The finest sculptural space I've ever witnessed being made
It would have been a real disaster if it had been crap
I soon realized that Ed's approach was unlike any other
organic
reflective
painfully slow
Well, I was like to think it's like an artistic installation I suppose it just and is grown in that way
the excitement of actually creating something
Sculptural and exciting and fun as well was really enjoyable
It's all very visual. Yeah, it's all very visual but and although experiential
Ed's been chiseling this crafted glory into being for over a decade
His children have grown up in a culture of designing, making, and making do
The benefits to a growing family are huge
If you want shelter you can just create shelter you don't have to go and just buy it you can make it yourself
I think it's, and they just think that's normal. You know, that's and I think that's really good for them
I have loved returning over the years and across the seasons
Very good to see you. I see you dressed up
Falling in with their way of life
Seeing the children grow up
Marveling at Ed's latest inventions
Learning what homespun architecture is
And Ed is still building. Right now, it's a home for his mother. Is there a deadline attached to that? there is
there is. It's like a serious one
It's the first deadline you must have had in years
And the best thing about this everlasting project
Is the hospitality and welcome
You've been going since 2007, so almost as long as the series
projects come and they go they tend to stop and you move on or you do another one, but this one is
continues to grow
It's a way of life. This is where it has to evolve and adapt and accommodate change.
Yeah
Like granny
This living breathing
Ecological self-build is a long essay or maybe a love letter to the beauty and nobility
of the well-made thing to invention
And to the joy that can be found in the everyday
And as it's grown, so it's changed to serve the needs of three generations now and again
This will be the sort of the main living area
This is great for once. I'm watching Ed under pressure
Do I have a bit of a divide between little bit of separation there?
Where's my ever halt?
This is why I keep coming back, to see things like this
To see the children come back, to see them grown up, and in this case Ed's mom
moving in. Clearly, she's committed to living this lifestyle. and that's a marker the success of the place
Amazing
This is one of my favorite grand desires. A wonderful place to be
I'd like to sum up
But I'm not going to because of course nothing is finished. And in any case, I'm coming back
The tranquillity here is of course in stark contrast to the trauma that many self builders endure
That didn't go well
I didn't enjoy the process very much
But that's okay, not everything have to make you happy
We've all been told to get off the site it could blow at any minute
I now feel like F the house, like really i'm so sorry
Been here 18 months now
I really wants to move in
That was probably one of the days where I thought, I've had enough of it
I thought i really like to wash my hair before being filmed
You want to calm down
Easy for you to say
Grand Designs
Promotes the idea that self build is difficult
It involves enormous commitment, a remarkable amount of time and energy
And i need to make an apology for them, because
Without effort there is no real reward. Without pain, there is no gain
Without sacrifice there can be no great triumph
Oh my word
Ooh
Oh gosh
Bang that is beautiful
After 20 years, I still gasp
Great architecture continues to arouse us strong, a visceral reaction. Oh heavens. This is good. Aha, yes.
Ooh my goodness
Ooh.
Woah
Just, so smooth and beautiful
Nice building, sorry
Sorry
Of all the ground designs projects that i've filmed, there's one that still
amazes. The story of money and manpower
A building which took only nine months to complete but which cost millions?
And it really stands out
Good grief
So, what makes a grand design huh? a building rising out of the ground, people
architects builders blood sweat tears
Mud
Bank, ruins, potholes, ruins of it
Passion, naivety. We are house building virgins, and God help us
running out of money
sacking the architects
Baby, and caravan
What is it with babies. I follow a project halfway through
A baby arrives
Nothing to do with me
Umm
I can't imagine anyone even having time to have sex. Yeah. It's too exhausting
But in the end if we're lucky, truly inspirational extraordinary architecture
Well, I've teased you long enough. Here's another favorite a big sticky out project that marks the hundredth episode of Grand Designs
Here we go
A gargantuan salvage project that cost enough to make your nose bleed. The monumental Kennington water tower
Seven years ago, it was a ruined Victorian Gothic landmark an unstable one of that almost beyond hope
This is something else this building, isn't it?
How many people do you know that lives in a water tower in zone one? Good, maybe good reason for that a
A sane person, if they'd seen this building would have run because it was up for sale for six months
and why didn't anyone buy it because
Nobody was as loopy as me and thinking it was gonna be easy would only cost two million pounds and even the architect thought nobody
Would do it
It was a filthy, but valiant struggle to save the tower
The important conservation thing is you know that it's been secured for the next 150 years
so that really matters to you that sense of legacy almost doing something which actually makes
Makes a contribution and adds value to future generation. Yes
Conserving the old and building the brand spanking new turned out to be obscenely expensive
When you're really spending money it's about 35,000 a week at the moment
It's just become a nightmare because there's all the huge bills are now coming in and
I'm trying to get all my all the credit cards and the limits increased so we can finish the job
Crazy but in just nine months they proved doubters of which I was one, wrong
This was a truly jaw-dropping home
Ka-ching. It's a six-man bath and a shower. Well it's nice for the local rugby club realm won't you?
At the end of the project us in debts of nearly everybody I knew, in a hundreds and millions
It may have come at great cost but it's no modern-day folly it's one of the most dynamic
Intelligent restoration projects. I've had the pleasure to follow
What is actually an unchanged building it so it is as pristine as, umm
When I saw it last. Seven years. Seven years ago. It's looking great as I say until you've changed both of you
Yes good or bad. No. No. No just a little bit more astute a bit more Hairy
I love this project for its heroism because Graham and Leigh dared to risk all and save a brooding monster
Tame it and transform it into a shining example
I like it cos, it's meaty
Because it's not just about exciting contemporary new build
It's also a proper project about conservation and it marries the two and it turned out you did it all in what?
Nine months, huh? Yeah, you know and it cost a fortune and that that of itself. I've never said how much it cost
No, like we could all guess. it's interesting why people are so interested what it cost doesn't matter what it cost
It's here and I got and I got through it
You were cute, right?
I mean, so I'm interested in the value of it socially here the value of it to you guys to the surrounding neighborhood
Yeah, all of that stuff matters and you saved a building in the process
There is a lot of press about this house and about us I thought the interest would maybe die after about a week and
It hasn't and it still going on
There on TV on the first and the Saturday morning, I think first proper weekend
Walked in to the kitchen here in it wasn't it wasn't a complete love actually moment in my underpants Ruggles
I was in some, you know messy bridge on the type of things, you know
And that lifted these blinds and there must have been 50 people outside all starting to take photos of me
And I thought I'd have enjoyed it. But I would have I look if I looked fabulous, but I didn't
And it didn't stop for weeks and weeks and weeks
Good dude how many floors
Oh what a reward
Wow
This doesn't disappoint does it, ey? No. A few new arrivals on the horizon well very much
So 360 degrees actually so differents when we built it what's popped up and what's gone and what's coming and this was of course
We're sitting in what was the water tank? It was originally full of water
And when we first came here, it was a grim black dark space for the pigeon crap
Good grief. Kevin don't get stuck because i'm not sure I'll get you out
It's vast. it sort of seems three or four times as big as the rooms downstairs
Oh my god, this will make the most fantastic room look at the roof, this is amazing
I'd never been in this room until we climbed up this huge tube, which was here and I was
Amazed at the size of it and thinking how we ever gonna convert this into a room
It's just it's still amazing it's not everybody's cup of tea
No, but it's still so unique and so unusual and I'm just so lucky. We've been living here for so long
So happy yeah, long may that continued.
you did think on the first when he met us the first time our a
Relationship wouldn't last there's gonna be all sorts of problems, but we got through it still here
I don't remember saying any such thing. I've watched the episode a few times. I haven't
Over the past 20 years
The projects we filmed involving old buildings that get restored or repaired or we used. Some of the most entertaining
Rich in complexity full of intrigue and it has to be said there are the projects that usually Harbor
the nastiest surprises
I'd always might the idea to convert a church
But how much do you pay for this? Uh, four hundred thousand pounds. For this? Yes
It's easy to say isn't it that in order to build a grand design you need deep pockets and a big budget that it's the
preserve of the moneyed middle classes
Except that it's not about how big a budget is, it's about how big your vision is
That's what makes a grand design, and next on my list is a man who embodies that who against pain and adversity
carved for himself a modest wonderful home
I think a good home should reflect somebody's personality and I think it should tell a little bit of a story of
You know that person's life and that's certainly how my home means
Wow, oh my lord
Welcome to the rock house
Reactions from all my friends and my family when I showed it to that. I think the general
Feeling was that I'd probably lost my mind
But I think it's because people couldn't see what I could see
Despite having been diagnosed with MS
Angelou said about turning these long abandoned cave dwellings in the forests of Worcestershire into a home.
I think I was probably you know a little bit naive and I think that that in some situations is a good thing
It was an epic tale of man against rock
I definitely physically suffered in the process. Yes
Had a terrible ringing in my ears for six, eight months afterwards
My right elbow had some kind of nerve damage and I couldn't even put my elbow on the dinner table
Not the way you meant to do that anyway
I dont know how he does it because each of those pieces weigh at least 10 kilos
Yeah, i'll try it. Right, your turn then Kevin. Okay
I mean Kevin definitely got stuck in
We did a sterling job when I was most impressed that he tidied up after himself as well
He toiled in atrocious conditions
So I was keen to see these efforts rewarded and they were. He achieved
'Cave Man Chic'
Hello
Oh you. it's delightful, Fred Flinstone would be very happy here
This is the nicest room isn't it, just beautiful
Angelo took the most unpromising hole in a rock and
Transformed it through force of character into a noble dwelling
I think secretly I like to think Kevin was you know, behind me from the beginning
I think he saw he saw what I saw maybe
one of you
What I found so life-affirming about Angelo's story is that although he was very mindful of his
diagnosis he was determined not to be
Defined by it
And you know over the years
There have been many examples of projects where the process of building but also the finished
House that the architecture itself has demonstrated a profound ability to improve people's lives
John White, A forces veteran built a home that gave back his independence
This is something stunning has come out of something pretty horrific
And the parents of children with some life-threatening allergies built a pioneering healthy home
That's actually grotesque. People come around and asked to see our filters, which is weird
But more importantly the children are doing so well, thank you for asking
One of my favorite grand designs that deserves special mention is a project in brighton built twenty years ago by ten
households who were waiting for council homes. It was astonishing
They don't want to build just houses. They want to build a community
They became the hedghog housing Co-op
I'm standing now on frame two of my house. This is my house. This is a grand moment
Debbie's has gone up this one and then next come tomorrow and honors and then Paul and Jenny's
That's the last frame to go up top of the world. Fantastic
They used the architect Walter Siegel's construction system to learn skills
Empower themselves and help build each other's homes. In so doing creating the magic social glue
That is the foundation of community
How many of the households that moved in are still in those same houses? All of them
Yeah? Seriously, it would be utterly crazy to leave here
I was hoping to follow many more projects like this
Turns out that wasn't the case at all. turns out actually they're very rare. They're quite precious things. It's a shame because
I found it inspirational and I think we could be doing more of that kind of thing
It demonstrates it to me
The great architecture and the process of making place can be something that really does change people's lives
Nice mahogany boudoir
You know, we have a great tradition in this country of eccentricity which for 20 years
It's been my pleasure to mine. I've met some really great oddballs
Building some really quirky homes
What earth possessed you to sell your beautiful house and want to live in that figure
Are there any other lifeboat stations that have been turned into houses I sincerely hope not
The plan has always been no windows at all
We're gonna build a house that can actually flow so an amphibious house
Eccentricities quite a strong word. So I personally don't consider myself eccentric, nor a bit eccentric
What's, Where's he from? He's from South Africa
He's Willy is like sort of plumb-line it so is his dead center of that panel at the back
Spot on
It's the Scooby Doo door. The white sofa Brigade can go and stuff it as far as I'm concerned
I suppose the opposite to eccentric is normal, and I'd hate to be called normal
You said that the building shouldn't have any horribleness about it and I have yet to discover the lumps
Good.
And you know
My favorite projects are not just my favorite pieces of architecture. They also involved my favorite people
They're the projects that leave a lasting impression. They are in a way,
my most favorite adventures
I had no doubt in putting one creative coupled adventure on my list of favorites
When I think about it, I'm amazed that we live here and then I'm amazed
It's our home and then I'm constantly reminded of that when people come and visit or you know
You buy something on the internet and a delivery person turns up and they go. What is this place? Do you live here?
And you kind of go. Yeah, I do
I first met Ben and Freddie both renowned artists 10 years ago
These mad collectors of ephemera, souls their cramped London home to take on a vast
16th century barn in the Essex countryside
Its scale was really intimidating and their approach nothing short of harebrained
It's not a house in the traditional sense of having an upstairs. No downstairs. We're predominantly gonna live in it at ground level
So it's to be a bit more like living in a Cathedral
We definitely didn't want to build a four bedroom family house inside a barn. Yeah, no trees in pots. No hanging baskets
No, no, but definitely not home in terms of a notification
Not interested in that
Everything about this project was overwhelming. It's the size of seven three-bedroom houses
And what they wanted to preserve at the barn bordered on
What happens to this air duct? Does that stays? That stays. For the chain the chain?
And a bit of stream. Well, how does that stay? Yeah
I had one problem with this project. You cannot make a big open space like this cozy
I don't want a cozy home
I don't want to live like most other people live. I don't want just that kind of life
I don't want that kind of building. I want something other. Why?
Because I'm putting difficult and demanding of the world and myself and life
This mammoth job proved intellectually, physically, my special croquette technique
And financially exhausting
Everything is not just double, it's exponentially more expensive
We held on earth but there was no choice it's not even if we didn't want to hold on earth
There was no choice about it. It's like it's like you have to come out the other end
Two and a half years and eight hundred and fifty grand later they had fused the ancient with the
Idiosyncratically modern into a home. I thought full of autobiography
Whoa, wait, look at this for a place. This is not as I would have imagined it. This is very cozy
It is, yeah
I loved this project because Ben and Freddie true to their word could have lightly preserved a beautiful 16th century barn
It's just an amazing building. I mean it was an amazing building before we converted it. And so and it's still an amazing building
I
Admired the ingenious roof lights made from expanded steel mesh and clear of critic panels to bring filtered light into the barn
beautiful
They meticulously took apart and reassembled two giant concrete grain silos to form bedrooms for themselves and their daughter
Is like they have a medieval castle staircase at the bell tower
And they made spaces for themselves to work in and
spaces to exhibit their extraordinary collections. Weird objects do finish a room
Weird objects make a home cozy
hmm
Kevin is impressively professional
I mean there were things about our lifestyle is not that the clutter think you wasn't that keen on but
By clutter Ben means our collections. Yes, not me a clutter. No
objects that we've collected off he wasn't that keen on fact they gave him the women where I think
How do people react to it. Well people they tend to either really love it really really hated really really yes
It functions as a home for us because we're a family of three
Idiosyncratic people. I don't think it's right for everyone, but we didn't build it for everyone. We only built it for us
So that's okay, isn't it?
In 20 years, there's been no better illustration of what happens when the creatives are allowed to run wild
If you're blessed with such talents no project is too daunting no space too vast
It's very liveable, I mean there are weird things but it's there it's warm and the rain doesn't come in. Yeah
And there are lots of toilets there, that's great and you can see out
You may think it's too quirky, but it's a favorite of mine and I like their collections
Anyway, everyone will have their own memorable project.
I love the one where he was a joiner. So that was his craft, but he built this beautiful kind of hexagonal shaped house
With this marvelous kind of twisted staircase built around his oak tree
That looked fabulous
There was the one with the vast brick arch
really rather lovely
the world's largest single spanning timber vaulted arts
The world's last Guinness Book of Records. Oh
The one that I really loved was the guy who lived in the woodland and managed the woodlands
The integrity of that that project was just something else
The one build that I really remember is a very elderly couple who put up a huff house. Oh, yeah
Amazing to see how that was built and put together and that was I think absolutely fascinating
Because for me one of the most exciting days of my life, I never believed they would do that much in one day
It's really staggering when you think 16 years later people still remember that program
Lovely to bits. Do you tingle?
I always tingle. It's perfect. Perfect for us
So it's the end of part three
But after the break the reveal of one last house, we all love the reveal because that's that
That's the moment of triumph, isn't it?
That's the moment of how far they got, did they finish it and won over that they put in their properties.
It's the feel-good extravagance or isn't it is the finale where we think. Wow, you know, it's amazing
It's like oh my gosh, it looks like that. Isn't that amazing?
I didn't think was going to look like that and of course then you realize what bad taste people have
Early morning mist hangs in the valley
Dewdrops shimmer on a cobweb, the Sun bursts through leafy trees
The teasing glimpse of a finished house
Obscured by the foreground
Then another
Who's this? a man with just the hint of a receding hairline
Wearing a well-chosen scarf approaches stops. Oh my word. Looks up
Wow
Music shifts up the gears, the camera swoops and soars
Glass glimpse, and
The fruits of months and years of toil are finally revealed
Oh this is another world ain't she
The more observant among you will have realized there is still time to visit one more of my top homes
So I've come all the way to rural Northern Ireland to share with you a
fabulous building I have to say it's probably
My favorite you bet if I had a favorite
It might be this one
Oh
This is great
Into the fairy Kingdom has landed quite gently something from Battlestar Galactica
It's magic this place if anything I think
It was nearly six years ago that I first met the farmer and architect Patrick Bradley, is this it that's it
This is magic
This beautiful spot on his family farm was to be the location of an award-winning piece of architecture
The dream was to build a house by the river. That is a big thing for Patrick chef containers
As everybody keeps telling me it's impossible
Itself build easy know
If it's easy you're cheating. I was lucky
You know, we got the land took a gamble and then cuz me being an architect as well. Just I'd be putting more excitement
Patrick's ambition was just to build a home his mother Anne wanted much more for her son
I am desperate for him to get a gorgeous Joe
It's an appeal it's an appeal
I thought this was a disaster in the making
20 legs
Well
Never Lauria staff commentary yard before
With the potential to ruin the most idyllic spot on the family farm
They're not very pretty either. Just other than that pretty
Patrick faced a desperate uphill struggle as we say to win over his doubters
Anybody who lives here is gonna look at that and thinks themselves. Oh, well, they put the porch cabins up
When are they gonna build the prison?
It really needed to be up cycling at its most inventive
Turning 10 grands worth of ugly metal shipping containers
Into an architectural delight
Everybody thought it was completely completely. Haha. You know what?
It's actually part of the charm, you know, because I always knew what the Virgin was going to be
This is just wow, this is just brilliant this is this is my boy
You know, this is so good
It was built in under ten months and for just a hundred and thirty three thousand Patek made a home that can make hearts saw
With not a single whiff of grotty shipping container it gets top marks from me almost faultless
Today five years on I'm back
Statue of a dog at the front transfix Burmese lovely to burn. It's great to have you back
After the program aired Patrick was inundated with hundreds of requests from all over the world to design container homes
How many container houses if you desert?
Zero apart from mine
The biggest negative container houses people can't get a fondle because there's no companies
I'd both fondle because they don't see it as the national construction. The mortgage companies interesting and Australia's appointment
I mean, you know the whole point about Miss
Extraordinary project is to demonstrate its sustainability its versatility. It's affordable
there's so many advantages to using these things, you know Scot ranching and there's absolutely gut-wrenching but
That's the banks for you
However Patrick continues to pioneer the use of this versatile building system
So this is your new
absolute unity
container clearly 45 and you've even managed to
Bolt it down at weather to get a big overhang at the other y'all love the cantilever
Love it love the cladding - in goes
It's great because again, it's surrounded by gorse bushes
- how are you? Good? Thanks. Are you yeah. Yeah. How many are you in the practice? Then? There's the three of us, okay
Nice. Yeah, what's brilliant? Sure. Imagine coming here every day to work. I'd sure look at the view either way
We just just imagined us to come
This is the gist of Elms, it's a great thing to be pushed out into the landscape and
Patricks succeeded in building lightly and beautifully on the planet, but there was one thing on a
Personal level that his mum was desperate to see him achieved
We had a conversation however at five six seven years ago and you said to me
If it you didn't say to me you turned to camera and you
You made an appeal. Oh heavens
It worked. They didn't it right wall has come Victoria. We shouldn't later
The most amazing thing either appearing in ground the same was definitely meeting Victoria death mother
Victoria's changed his life Kevin
And for the better
She is perfect. You know, I don't think anything can be better right now. You don't think we could be happy right now, man
Is missing part of the ejector
That's just good
You mean been together what for three years? Yeah and
Get married next year. No. Yes, wonderful Oh, congratulations. Thanks very much. Thanks very much
Absolutely tough for you. You invite me to the wedding, of course you
Know camera you have to say yes, not the best mind. You can be the page boy
Did you ever see the program we made about Patrick in this house, of course I watched the program
I even know where I was or sitting on a pink sofa with my friend in London
and we boys turned each other and something it was like
That's your future husband. You joke, I'm not joking ever. Well. Did you fall in love with the house or with him?
This project is so close to my heart
Inventive low-energy and low impact and it's not just a beautiful house
Its architecture that actually enhances the beauty of its setting
It's been wonderful to revisit some of my favorite buildings from over the last 20 years
And this has been perhaps the most touching story to finish with
so thank you for
Indulging me well, that would be weird wouldn't it if you agreed with all of my choices?
Because I know you have opinions
but one thing is absolutely for sure and that is that self build in Britain is now a
National movement more people are doing it than ever before
Which means?
we need
Our exemplars we need our pioneers and our eccentrics to continue building. So I
salute the
experimentalists
long may they flourish and
Long may we continue to film?
What a wild reducible place to glue the house I
Think we all need to abandon this position and get downstairs
We're gonna overspend by hundred thousand pounds. Oh, yes
I wasn't expected to be that bad. I hope
All of this can at any moment be swept away by the forces of nature
So brand new grand design starts next Wednesday at 9:00 also new Phil and Kirstie and a property unicorn
They've been told to find they can handle next Wednesday at 8:00
But coming up daunting for some but not for a lady who is beaten cancer and can still sing a hymn whilst choosing her date
naked attraction